Cloud Computing Fundamentals – An Introduction to Digital Transformation

The cloud computing revolution is impacting organizations of all sizes, across industries, and all over
the globe. Fundamentally, new ways of building systems, architecting infrastructure, and managing
data have created a perfect storm for the cloud, with the total market value expected to hit $1 trillion
by 2032 (according to Global Market Insights at https://www.gminsights.com/industryanalysis/public-cloud-market). As this massive growth market continues to expand, the
need for talent that is familiar with the latest technologies and innovations also grows. The need for
Google Cloud talent is particularly acute, with Google being the fastest-growing hyperscale cloud
provider as of Q1 2023 with a growth rate of 28% YoY and an annual run rate of nearly $30 billion
(as per https://abc.xyz/investor/static/pdf/2023Q1_alphabet_earnings_
release.pdf). This book is designed to provide a baseline understanding of Google’s approach
to the cloud for both business and technology professionals and prepare you to certify as a Google
Cloud Digital Leader.
In this first chapter, we will introduce foundational concepts for cloud computing and explore Google’s
view of it by highlighting how Google defines digital transformation, along with both the business
and technical forces driving businesses to adopt cloud solutions.
Here is a summary of what will be covered:
• How and why the cloud is transforming businesses
• The benefits of the cloud for digital transformation
• Elaborating on digital transformation with Google Cloud
• Describing how a transformation cloud accelerates innovation
We will cover these learnings via the following topics:
• An introduction to data centers
• The why behind digital transformation
• The benefits of digital transformation
• Hypothetical case study – Acme Inc.
An introduction to data centers
To understand where the hyperscale cloud industry is today and where it’s headed, it’s helpful to dig
into how the industry came about. The term cloud refers to a system or application that is being used
for a business purpose where the infrastructure for that system is centralized, typically in a location
referred to as a data center. Data centers are warehouses specifically built for housing advanced
computing hardware, networking equipment, data, and applications.
Data centers are composed of racks and racks of servers, a business term to refer to a computer,
along with networking equipment, storage arrays, and cooling and power equipment, among other
components. Servers themselves are typically composed of a core processing unit (CPU), random
access memory (RAM), and disk, which is typically either a hard drive or flash drive to store data. The
CPU is typically used for computational tasks such as solving a math problem while RAM is used to
store data temporarily, typically because data is being used by an application and being transformed
in some way. Disk and flash drives are used to store data for a longer period, with disk drives being a
cheaper, mechanical storage device and flash drives being more expensive given that data is stored in
a semiconductor chip. Servers are used to host applications that are typically either internally facing,
helping employees more efficiently and effectively do their job, or externally facing, providing services
to customers and partners.
When discussing data centers, it’s helpful to define the different types. We’ll start by understanding
the traditional approach: on-premises infrastructure. On-premises is a term that’s used to refer to
an organization that hosts its technology infrastructure onsite at offices or other business facilities.
For example, if you are a legal firm, your systems would be on-premises if they were hosted at the
same location as your office. There would be a server room or several rooms at the facility where all
of the systems and data are hosted for the employees to complete their work. This location would
host the systems that support worker productivity and internal workflows, while also facilitating
business operations.
This approach had benefits such as making it relatively easy to secure systems and applications. If all of
the systems and data are hosted within your organization’s physical locations, and they are not accessible
from the internet, you can establish a strong security posture through physical controls such as allowing
only employees to access your facilities and not allowing them to take their workstations home with
them. At a small scale, this is also a very manageable approach to infrastructure given that you could
operate it with a small team and troubleshoot issues by reaching out to your local IT administrators.
However, as organizations and systems began to become more complex, scale globally, and support
new patterns of work, new approaches began to surface. If the legal firm, for example, were to grow to
10 offices around the globe, it would be very difficult to continue to work via distributed, on-premises
systems. Each office would need its own technology, infrastructure, and IT personnel and there would
need to be a way for workers across offices to work together. They would need to share data, even if
it were sensitive; if perhaps the New York and London offices were working together on a case for a
multinational company operating in both the US and the UK. These pressures led to the centralization
of infrastructure, which is where the term cloud comes from.
Let’s explore the two core variations of cloud hosting: private cloud and public cloud. An organization
leverages the private cloud when a company is running environments where there is only one tenant
– themselves. This may mean that it owns and operates all of the data center infrastructure itself. The
company buys or leases land, manages the building, procures the servers, installs the operating systems,
and manages the applications and data while also being responsible for both the physical and virtual
security of the private cloud. In some circumstances, they may procure the space from a third-party
vendor but they are ultimately responsible for the hardware, software, and networking infrastructure,
with the space within the facility dedicated exclusively to them. Some drawbacks of the private cloud
are the requirements for large capital expenditure on real estate, equipment, and operating costs, as
well as the deep complexity that comes along with having to design, build, maintain, secure, and scale
their infrastructure.
In contrast, when an organization leverages the public cloud, it offloads much of the physical
responsibility of operating a data center to a third party. Google Cloud is a public cloud platform
where developers and engineers can access infrastructure built on top of Google’s data centers and
networks. This enables businesses to offload responsibilities such as building and managing the physical
components of the data center to specialize in what will provide value to their customers. Customers
of public cloud providers benefit by abstracting away much of the complexity of managing technology
infrastructure by focusing on the virtualization layer and above. This means being responsible for the
virtual machines, operating systems, applications, and data to operate their businesses.
A company that operates hybrid cloud environments blends both public and private cloud environments.
They may have their own data centers hosting internal or sensitive applications while leveraging the
public cloud for externally facing applications. This pattern is common in organizations that built
up their own data centers and are building new applications in the cloud or are migrating systems to
optimize for the most efficient hosting strategy. In some cases, they may build a data warehouse in the
cloud to consolidate and organize data from disparate on-premises systems such as sales, marketing,
logistics, and fulfillment data.
Multi-cloud is a cloud computing strategy where companies use multiple public cloud providers to
host their applications. This allows them to run their workloads optimally across multiple environments 
and vendors, reducing the risk that arises related to vendor lock-in, where organizations become
restricted in their ability to innovate and negotiate cost when they consolidate their infrastructure
under a single vendor. Managing environments across multiple cloud providers can be complex given
the variations between the platforms and the potential required integrations. Multi-cloud is becoming
more common as engineers build skills across multiple providers and vendors begin to differentiate
themselves through unique capabilities, partnerships, or contracting vehicles.
With the advent of cloud computing, we’ve also seen the rise of a new breed of technology company:
cloud-native. Google Cloud states the following (https://cloud.google.com/learn/
what-is-cloud-native):
“Cloud native means adapting to the many new possibilities – but a very different
set of architectural constraints – offered by the cloud compared to traditional
on-premises infrastructure. Unlike monolithic applications, which must be built,
tested, and deployed as a single unit, cloud-native architectures decompose
components into loosely coupled services to help manage complexity and improve
the speed, agility, and scale of software delivery.”
Another concept that goes hand in hand with cloud-native is open source, as it relates to how software
is developed and the accompanying standards with this shift. Historically, software has been closed
source, meaning that the code base was owned and only viewable by the manufacturer. This led to a
rise in enterprise software licensing where things such as vendor lock-in come into play, where you
are at the mercy of the manufacturer from both a cost and capability perspective, locked into multiyear contracts, and unable to implement nor change the code base based on your needs.
and vendors, reducing the risk that arises related to vendor lock-in, where organizations become
restricted in their ability to innovate and negotiate cost when they consolidate their infrastructure
under a single vendor. Managing environments across multiple cloud providers can be complex given
the variations between the platforms and the potential required integrations. Multi-cloud is becoming
more common as engineers build skills across multiple providers and vendors begin to differentiate
themselves through unique capabilities, partnerships, or contracting vehicles.
With the advent of cloud computing, we’ve also seen the rise of a new breed of technology company:
cloud-native. Google Cloud states the following (https://cloud.google.com/learn/
what-is-cloud-native):
“Cloud native means adapting to the many new possibilities – but a very different
set of architectural constraints – offered by the cloud compared to traditional
on-premises infrastructure. Unlike monolithic applications, which must be built,
tested, and deployed as a single unit, cloud-native architectures decompose
components into loosely coupled services to help manage complexity and improve
the speed, agility, and scale of software delivery.”
Another concept that goes hand in hand with cloud-native is open source, as it relates to how software
is developed and the accompanying standards with this shift. Historically, software has been closed
source, meaning that the code base was owned and only viewable by the manufacturer. This led to a
rise in enterprise software licensing where things such as vendor lock-in come into play, where you
are at the mercy of the manufacturer from both a cost and capability perspective, locked into multiyear contracts, and unable to implement nor change the code base based on your needs.
Containers were a new way of thinking about how to run applications as they relate to the underlying
hardware and software. In the world of virtual machines, the application, operating system, and
hardware are fundamentally coupled. This means that if the hardware fails, the application also fails.
Containers allowed developers to scale applications more gracefully and build more fault tolerance into
their architecture and systems. It also happened to be a more cost-effective way of hosting applications
given that resources could be shared across several systems to ensure maximum utilization while
minimizing cost.
This shift in designing and architecting systems translated very well to cloud-native organizations,
given their flexibility and ability to rapidly innovate. More traditional organizations began to adopt
similar practices as they began to comprehend the value that these approaches can deliver to their
business, with start-ups rising quickly and disrupting industry after industry.
The shift from private to public cloud, by offloading the responsibilities of building and managing
data centers, has enabled businesses to focus on driving change that has a meaningful impact on
the bottom line. Engineers who had historically been tasked with monitoring onsite infrastructure
or managing databases can be repurposed to increase developer productivity, improve the security
posture, or engage in R&D projects.
As we explore the forces behind why businesses have been shifting to public cloud adoption, it’s helpful
to start by defining digital transformation, including its importance and benefits.
The why behind digital transformation
Over the last few decades, we’ve seen a steady shift of businesses and systems from analog to digital. With
this shift came a significant change in how companies build teams, design go-to-market strategies, and
generate revenue. This shift was fundamentally a shift from paper-based processes to computing-based
processes, where files and data went from being stored in filing cabinets to databases and filestores.
Imagine that you had to run a sales report to understand how much a department had done in sales
over the last 10 years, growth rate year over year, and project out 5 additional years of sales. If the
documents you required were on paper and scattered across three different sites, it may take weeks
to collect them, analyze them, and provide the desired report. If, however, all of the data had been
digitized and made available through an application, you would be able to run a report within seconds.
Moving from weeks to seconds is a massive productivity boost and would enable business leaders to
make faster, more accurate decisions. This is an example of the value digital transformation can provide.
According to the Google Cloud documentation (https://cloud.google.com/learn/
what-is-digital-transformation), the official definition is as follows:
“It uses modern digital technologies – including all types of public, private, and
hybrid cloud platforms – to create or modify business processes, culture, and
customer experiences to meet changing business and market dynamics.”
The push to digitally transform is felt across organizations, as highlighted by the official definition,
as it impacts not only the tools the technology team uses but also the organizational culture and the
ability to deliver modern customer experiences. Engineers often have to learn new skills or completely
new technologies, adapting how they’ve worked to address the needs of today.
There are many reasons why companies choose to go through this transformation:
• Infrastructure flexibility
• Ease of R&D
• Quantifiable innovation
• Global collaboration
• Customer value
• Agility
Let’s explore these in detail.
Infrastructure flexibility
In the world of physical data centers, capacity planning and availability can be a big blocker. Having
a server procured, shipped, configured, and pushed online can take days, weeks, or even months,
depending on the circumstances. One of the big advantages of working with a cloud provider is that
machines of all shapes and sizes are available through the click of a button. Spinning up a server,
whether it’s in the US, Europe, or Asia, is a trivial workflow that makes it very easy to spin up servers
virtually, deploy them, and manage them. It’s all done through a secure internet connection and if
you decide that you no longer need something, you can spin it down to effectively stop paying for it.
Ease of R&D
By leveraging a cloud provider such as Google, organizations can quickly and easily access, test
and validate new technologies as they are developed and launched. They can spin up development
projects within a secure environment, ensuring that corporate or customer data won’t be accidentally
leaked and that they have access to the latest technology being launched by cloud providers and their
independent software vendor (ISV) partners.
Measurable innovation
When experimenting with different services, tools, and technologies, it can often be challenging to
define success criteria and costs and make the right decisions. By leveraging a data-centric approach to
testing and validation, businesses can quickly iterate on their developments and make smart decisions
based on the results.
Global collaboration
Working with cross-functional teams that are distributed across the globe can be an issue whenever
you don’t have the right tools, systems, and processes in place to facilitate the collaboration without
the appropriate security and compliance controls. Through digital transformation, you can make
data more accessible to people who need it, when they need it, while still ensuring compliance with
existing requirements.
Customer value
The demands that come from customers are ever-evolving concerning developments in the market and
associated technologies. By analyzing how customers prefer to engage, how they grow through their
life cycle, and what needs arise throughout that journey, businesses can provide tailored experiences
that meet and exceed customer expectations. They can find patterns and reasons why people leave the
platform for example, identify the root cause(s), and implement a way to overcome those challenges
proactively, thereby increasing retention and reducing churn.
Agility
Organizations are having to compete on a global scale with companies large and small to win new
customers and retain existing ones. Through digital transformation, development teams are enabled
to accelerate the pace at which they innovate while also being able to significantly increase the scale
of their launches. Rather than having to launch a service in a specific region or city due to process or
technology constraints, businesses can now build once and launch anywhere through innovations
such as global cloud providers and Infrastructure as Code (IaC).
Agility
Organizations are having to compete on a global scale with companies large and small to win new
customers and retain existing ones. Through digital transformation, development teams are enabled
to accelerate the pace at which they innovate while also being able to significantly increase the scale
of their launches. Rather than having to launch a service in a specific region or city due to process or
technology constraints, businesses can now build once and launch anywhere through innovations
such as global cloud providers and Infrastructure as Code (IaC).
There are many reasons for a business to transform from analog, paper-based processes to digital
processes. Not only will employees be more productive, but they’ll be more innovative and make
better decisions. Workflows that might’ve taken days, weeks, or months can be compressed into days,
hours, or even seconds. A common anecdote for demonstrating the impact of failing to digitize is the
story of Blockbuster. Blockbuster was a brick-and-mortar store where you would go to rent or buy
movies and TV shows. The walls and floors were lined with shelves covered in empty VHS and DVD
boxes highlighting which titles were available. Many customers had come to cherish the experience
of walking through those aisles, exploring interesting titles and genres until they finally found the
one – and hoped it was in stock! Blockbuster, by 2004, had 9,000 stores globally (as per https://
www.businessinsider.com/blockbuster-is-closing-forever-2013-11)
and earned $5.9 billion in revenue (as per https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/
data/1085734/000119312507239499/dex991.htm).
Fast forward to 2023 and you won’t find a Blockbuster anywhere as they were digitally disrupted by
Netflix. They started by competing with Blockbuster through a video-mailing service, eliminating the
need to go to a physical location and be at the mercy of what was in stock, but eventually moved onto
cloud-based video streaming. Online video streaming created a new way to browse and consume content,
where a customer had a massive library of titles at their fingertips. Customers began to expect to be able
to watch the latest release from the comfort of their homes without having to worry about whether or
not Blockbuster had that video in stock. Today, Netflix continues to be a successful company, having
reached $8.1 billion in quarterly revenue for Q1 of 2023 (as per https://www.statista.com/
statistics/273883/netflixs-quarterly-revenue/#:~:text=In%20the%20
first%20quarter%20of,the%20corresponding%20quarter%20of%202022). They
are now facing an innovation dilemma as they face intense competition from new services such as
Disney+, Paramount+, and Max.
Now that we understand why organizations are transforming digitally, let’s explore the benefits of
going through that transition.
Benefits of digital transformation
There are many benefits to transforming a business so that it can leverage the latest advances in
computing, software, and data technologies. Whether it’s launching new products or building new
capabilities into an existing business, the technology space is ever evolving and the pace of innovation
seems to be increasing. Companies that have implemented or were born digital as cloud-native
companies have a significant advantage over those that haven’t.
Whether it’s going from a monolithic application architecture that struggles to serve global clients
to containers, Kubernetes, and global service orchestration, or the adoption of a data warehouse to
empower analytics use cases, organizations that embrace a new way of doing things can make the
most of new technologies as they quickly learn, test, validate and adopt them.
According to the Google Cloud documentation, here are the main benefits of going through
digital transformation:
• Modernize infrastructure
• Manage data
• Gain insight
• Break down team silos
• Solve business problems
• Realize cost savings
Let’s look at them in detail.
Modernize infrastructure
Companies that transform digitally and adopt cloud-native ways of architecting systems can
meaningfully optimize their hardware and software usage. By migrating away from building and
managing infrastructure themselves, they can quickly and easily build systems that have evolved
from the traditional, server-based architecture to more modern, service-based architecture or even
serverless systems. These systems allow their engineers to automate much of the day-to-day tasks of
operating and managing infrastructure through features such as auto-scaling, which dynamically scales
the infrastructure up and down based on load. They also allow for global traffic routing, ensuring that
customers have the best experience based on their geography and minimizing the time and effort
required to build systems that scale globally.
Manage data
Data is exploding and as companies try to gain more insight into the health of their go-to-market
approach and how their customers think about them, being able to capture, organize, and integrate
these datasets can be challenging. Digital transformation empowers you to go from paper processes
to digital processes where new tools and capabilities can be applied to store, transform, analyze, and
monetize data. Organizations can ingest vast amounts of data, going from terabyte to petabyte to
hexabyte scale from a myriad of different systems, regardless of whether they’re internal or external.
Gain insight
Digital systems not only allow you to more easily and efficiently manage data but also facilitate the
act of deriving value from the data. Companies can adopt new approaches to sharpen the focus of
their business on their core value, applying things such as machine learning to provide more value to
their customers and generate new revenue streams. Business leaders can also be empowered to make
better decisions through higher fidelity real-time data, which gives them a better understanding of
the current state of the business and what challenges it faces.
Break down team silos
The transition from paper to digital also facilitates productivity and collaboration for teams across
geographies. Employees can easily find, access, share, and collaborate on files and projects at the speed
of light rather than being at the mercy of paper-based processes. Customers also benefit from this as
the teams that they work with can deliver more value faster relative to competitors who don’t adopt
modern practices. A marketing team in India, for example, might need to update a campaign for the
local market. With a digital cloud-based system, a team in the US can quickly and easily upload all of
the raw marketing files to a shared drive where the India team can access it to make the appropriate
updates, all with the click of a button.
Solve business problems
The adoption of technology also helps organizations approach their processes and applications with
a new lens. Digital systems help business leaders quickly pinpoint challenges within the organization
and its engagement with customers. By equipping them with the information they need to improve
how they work and engage with customers, the business can dynamically solve problems as they arise
and can continuously refine its approach.
Realize cost savings
The result of implementing digital systems and modern ways of doing business across people,
processes, and technology also results in cost savings. Paper-based processes are often cumbersome
and expensive, requiring significant human work and can be very slow. These challenges can be
overcome by implementing technology to automate away process complexity and cost. For example,
through paper processes, it may take weeks to generate, validate, issue, and execute a contract. You
have to engage multiple teams to put the paperwork together, validate that what is generated will
pass integrity checks, and have the appropriate provisions. From there, you may have to mail or fax a
contract to someone and hope that someone is on the other end to pick it up and put it through the
appropriate process. Through a digital system, however, you can automate the specific contractual
requirements to have them generated with the click of a button and issued for signature – within
hours rather than weeks.
There are many benefits to transforming digitally, ranging from realizing cost savings, solving business
problems, and breaking down silos to more technical reasons such as modernizing infrastructure,
managing data, and gaining insight from that data.
Hypothetical case study – Acme Inc.
Behind many of the major technological revolutions of the past couple of decades, there were often
developments in key variables making them possible; computing, networking, and data. Whether we
are discussing personal computers, smartphones, or cloud computing, they were all enabled thanks to
advances in the density and scale of computing resources, the availability and quality of networking,
and the accessibility of data.
Before we dive into the intricacies of Google Cloud, its services, and the impact it is having on
businesses, it is important to establish foundational knowledge to ensure we start on the same page.
Let’s frame the technological revolution by following along with a hypothetical company, Acme Inc.
Acme Inc. – its evolution from the 1980s to the 2020s
In the early days of Acme Inc., when it was first founded in the 1980s, they were selling desktop
software for personal computers. They had three offices, each with their own server closet, where any
required systems were installed and hosted. Most of their corporate processes were based on paper,
with the vast majority of the work not being digital. Security was relatively easy to set up and manage;
only the two IT folks on the team had access to the server rooms and all employees left their corporate
computers at the office – they were locked down to their desks. In this world, the perimeter was well
defined; everyone had to go to the office to access corporate systems and through physical security,
you could generally ensure the infrastructure was secure. No one could take their computers home
and IT must be onsite to troubleshoot but overall, it seemed to be working and life went on.
As time passed, Acme Inc. continued to grow and by the 1990s, they had 10 offices around the US. The
IT team realized that they wouldn’t be able to physically manage and troubleshoot distributed systems
across 10 offices and they needed to pivot their model. They had started digitizing their processes
given the needs of the business and clients. Meanwhile, finance was starting to complain about the
many hardware and software purchases required to maintain the technology ecosystem. Between all
of the server and license requests, they decided to implement centralized infrastructure, empowering
them to purchase equipment in bulk and making life easier for the IT team by consolidating all of the
infrastructure that they needed to manage in one location.
Acme Inc. implemented a data center strategy and by the 2000s, they were running a couple of private
cloud locations. They adopt VMware and virtualization to make the most of their hardware, allowing
them to maximize hardware utilization by sharing the compute resources from their servers across
multiple applications. They set up a backup and disaster recovery strategy by running a hot-cold setup
where their backup data center would help them recover from any issues with the primary location.
Managing all of the corporate infrastructure, however, started to become a burden given the heavy
weight and cost of running a data center. Between keeping up with all of the security vulnerabilities,
ensuring hardware procurement would support future capacity needs, and also managing finance’s
complaints about large capital expenditures, the IT team became overwhelmed.
Thankfully, the advent of Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) solutions came onto the scene as organizations
were looking to offload the responsibility of managing and securing infrastructure. IT can procure
technology solutions that are hosted for them, empowering them to focus exclusively on permissions
and data for the application while not having to worry about all of the additional layers of infrastructure
that need to be addressed when you host things yourself.
Going into the 2010s, Acme Inc. adopted several SaaS solutions for their infrastructure, ranging from
productivity tools such as email, HR, and finance systems. The core of what they offered, however, was
still self-hosted as their desktop application was now being modernized to be offered as a service. This
ensured that you would be able to generate predictable, recurring revenue (keeping finance happy) and
help address the needs of your clients. Unfortunately, because their data center was still self-hosted,
Acme Inc. discovered that a nation-state attacker was able to access a database that one of their admins
forgot to patch. This caused much pain for IT and sales as Acme Inc. now had to navigate challenging
conversations about how they manage infrastructure and had a hard time earning the trust of their
customers. Fortunately for Acme Inc., there was a new computing revolution just on the horizon.
By 2020, Acme Inc. decided to migrate its infrastructure from on-premises to an Infrastructure-asa-Service (IaaS) provider. This enabled the Acme Inc. team to focus less on managing and securing
the lower layers of infrastructure while empowering them to focus on projects that would move the
needle for their organization. Rather than managing a database, their data engineer started building
out a data lake. They moved all of their servers from their on-premises data centers to the cloud,
which enabled them to spin down those assets and sell them off.
With this capital burden being lifted, the Acme Inc. team invested in improving developer productivity
and adopted a few new approaches to building code and managing teams: DevOps and microservicesbased architecture. By adopting more modern approaches to launching applications, Acme Inc.’s
application is now more scalable and easily improvable than ever before. They push code to production
weekly and can compete with even the hottest, most well-funded start-ups.
Summary
In our case study about Acme Inc., we touched on many of the key elements driving the change we
are seeing in technology from a data center perspective. The variables that are constantly in tension
with building and managing technology infrastructure fundamentally are cost versus performance
and distributed versus centralized. Many of the changes that Acme Inc. implemented, whether it
was going from closet server rooms to mainframes to virtualization to containers, were meant to
overcome challenges around finance and customer experiences. When designing cloud systems, we
are constantly trading off how we can deliver an excellent experience while trying to minimize cost.
We’ll see this as a common theme as we explore different use cases and prepare for the exam questions;
often, you’ll have to think through what would be the best system for the job given specific technical,
business, and financial restraints.
Now that we have a general sense of why organizations around the world and across industries are
transforming themselves, it’s time to cover foundational cloud concepts. The focus for Chapter 2 will
be on understanding why and how the cloud is adopted across different scenarios and business cases.
We’ll explore the benefits of cloud infrastructure, along with how networking is the foundation upon
which the cloud is built.